As
I understand it, and I haven't checked out weather
records, but as I understand it, about Friday the
9th of July, it started to rain down that country.
And it just rained over that weekend, and by Monday
the 12th, they had, they felt they had a situation
on their hands. So evidently on Monday the 12th and
Tuesday the 13th, they began calling Jarvis
Miller up here to, well, what can we do? And they set
up that meeting then for Wednesday the 14th. And
Dudley Smith called several people to see if we
could go down there and meet with this group. And we
went down on Wednesday in the University Plain,
left here in the rain and flew down in the rain the
whole way. And when we got down below the clouds at
Corpus, you'd look down at the ground and there
would be these dark areas that you might mistake
for plowed fields. But as you got lower, you found
out that they were this stuff right here, this
chocolate brown grain. And there were just
puddles of water all over the place. So, now as I
understand it too, the rain had kind of slacked off
on Tuesday, but it started raining again Tuesday
night after this meeting, or maybe they were still
negotiating over the meeting. But at any rate, it
rained all Tuesday night and apparently all day
Wednesday. And on Wednesday afternoon, the 14th,
when we were in session down there, it really came
up good. They had a tornado out west of Robstown.
And there was a field of grain like this that was
right across the drive there from the center
building that just laid flat between 2 and 3
o'clock that afternoon. So it was kind of a bad
deal. There were people there from... The
elevators, the grain exchange, the county
agents, there were a few farmers and just kind of a
general gathering, obviously. They all were
looking for what was going to happen. And they had
samples of grain that had come from elevators and
from the grain exchange, and some the county
agents had taken and they hid them in bags in there,
and they were all labeled by hybrid number and all
this kind of stuff. And you'd see everything from
grain, of course these were a lot worse looking
when they were wet. That was one that you might call
that 100% sprouted. And they seemed to pretty well
have singled out certain hybrids that were
weathering and sprouting worse than others. And
one apparently that they considered to be a bad one
from the standpoint of standing the weathering
was use
any name, but I'm pretty sure it was a Pioneer
8308B. And
everywhere you'd go, they'd mention this one and
have ever since. But at any rate, they gave us,
let's see, there was Lloyd Rooney and... And
Miller, not Fred Miller, another Miller out of
Plant Science. Charles Miller. You don't have him
on this list, do you? No, he's not really working
with the group on it very much. See, what was it,
Dudley mentioned him, Charles Miller in Plant
Sciences, when fields dry out, what are the
problems? Right, that's right. And then the boy
from Ag Engineering to talk a little bit about what
they might do. Richard Withers. Richard Withers.
Is that W-I-T-H-E-R-S? Yes, yes. He's apparently
new, been on the job four or five months, something
like that. He was simply considering things that
they might do from the standpoint of their combine
settings and stuff like this. help the situation
some. Well they gave us about an hour or so to look at
these samples and then we went and ate lunch and
after lunch we had to get together and make up our
minds what we were going to say at a two o'clock
press conference they'd called and I bet you there
were 150 people there at that darn thing. All the
elevator operators in the area came in there and
And we have this kind of a four or five man
symposium, each one of us made a statement with
regard to our particular area. And well, what
seemed perfectly obvious that day was that the
first thing it's gonna have to do is get it dried up
enough where they can get it out of the field. And we
figured that if it had stopped raining right then
and sun had come out bright and pretty the next day
and it hadn't rained anymore it would be ten days or
two weeks before they could get in the field to do
anything. And that's about the way it turned out
actually too. I didn't feel too badly about the
grain if it could be gotten out of the field and if
they could clean it pretty well. And since that
time we've picked up bits and pieces from here,
there, and yonder We didn't go down there
authorized to do anything or to make any promises
to do anything. We just simply were to go down and
offer assessment and hold their hand. And I told
them, I said, well, I can sympathize with you a
whole lot, but the first thing that's going to
happen is to get it dried up enough to get it out of
the field and assuming that can be done. I'm quite
sure that we can feed it because cattle are not
extremely sensitive to mold and probably a lot of
these things will dry off and probably won't cause
much trouble anyway. But I did say that I thought
they should be real cautious about sheep and
probably poultry and dairy cattle and perhaps
pigs. This
was all a thing that I think was in the back of
everybody's mind, but we've had this sort of thing
before and of course haven't had very much trouble
with it. Well then O.D. and I and Neville Clark and
Charlie Boyd went down He was in charge of the large
animal clinic in that hospital. We were down there
on
Monday and Tuesday, the third, second and third.
And the combines were going, you'd see them going
across the field and they looked like they were
traveling in a cloud with dust and stuff boiling
out of them. And the grain was being delivered to
those elevators and feed stores and whatnot and
just had it in great mountains. What percentage
moisture was it, John? Well, probably everything
from 18, 19 percent down. 35? No, no. It was dried up
by then pretty well. They could get in there and
combine it and get it out and the dust was flying.
Every place they were handling the grain, there
was dust and dirt boiling up. And I know there at
Beeville, it just looked like the dust from that
elevator just coated that whole part of town. You
know, like a gin in the fall. You know, that dust
blows all over the place. And the man there said
that about all the grain he was getting was number
four in sample grade. And we asked him if he had any
market value on it or any market established on it,
and he said no. Really, we're just kind of, The
farmers own the stuff. I'm just keeping it here for
them. We're waiting for somebody to make an offer.
Well, at any rate, that day we pretty well decided
that we'd better try to do something with it. We
still didn't have any authorization from the
director's office to do this, unless O.D. had it,
and he never said anything about it. We went down to
consult with Wilk Bank about his nutrition and
animal health programs, really. But it looked
like it was such a problem right there at Beeville
and we went on down to Perry Foundation at
Rockstown and saw some of the grain they had
harvested the same variety before and after the
wet season. And they offered to do a cattle feeding
test using these two grains. to get some
assessment there. They had done one test
previously coupled to, well, last time we had this
problem to a lesser degree, 1972 or 73, I guess.
At any rate, we came back and I called our nutrition
group and some other folks together for our brown
bag session we have at noon on Wednesday. Dudley
Smith came over for it and at that session in that
day we pretty well formulated our ideas with
regard to what should be done well in brief what we
concluded we'd better do is first of all include
this badly weathered grain in our grain quality
evaluation Now we got the other end of this from out
in the high plains in April when they were making a
strong pitch for some work that would permit
some sort of a characterization of grain on a
quality basis that would be more closely related
to its feeding value. I think a thing that caused
them some concern up there was the fact that
there's growing interest in the use of wet grain,
like the early harvested or reconstituted idea.
Does that have to be put in your airtight silos?
Well, it does unless you've got acid treatment,
which is the other thing that they're interested
in. In the Glen Deans feed yard up there at Sunray,
right east of Dumas a little ways, had been using
the acid treatment on corn for two years. And he
claimed ridiculously low losses. In other words,
something like 7 tenths to 9 tenths of 1%. And he
just got a mountain of it out there just treated and
out there in a big old mound. You know how they do it.
No, I don't really. Well, they don't make any temp.
Put it in a bin and just pile it out there on the
ground. What does the treatment, though, entail?
Well, the treatment entails spraying what they
were using is a product called Chemstore that
really is a mixture of about 80% propionic acid and
20% formalin. And they just simply spray this on.
It's applied according to the moisture content of
the grain. A higher moisture content will get a
higher rate of application. After it's stacked?
This is as it's stacked. As it's stacked. In other
words, as they bring it in, truck by truck. It goes
through a blast of this stuff? No, it goes through
an auger thing that treats it. In other words, they
spray it on. I guess you'd call it a blast if you
wanted to. But it's nothing in the world except a
little auger that's about a 10-foot auger. It's
got a hopper at the bottom end that they can dump out
of a truck into. It's just a way to pass it through.
The grain goes up this little spiral little auger
conveyor, and there's a box that's got metering
devices on it. And it's got some nozzles strung up
and down this auger that sprays this acid on there
as it goes. And it's so rigged up that if you run out
of acid or if you run out of grain, either one
separately, it'll shut the machine down. So you
won't be putting grain in that hasn't been
treated, and you won't be running acid through
with no grain. So it's kind of an automatic
shutdown arrangement on it. Well, then this is
just simply augured up and they're just pilot. And
we've done some work with this several years back.
The interesting thing about the acid treatment is
that it apparently completely sterilizes the
grain. And somebody at a meeting at Oklahoma State
here recently, a wet grain conference, said after
you treat it with acid, the stuff just lays there
like a pile of marbles, even though it's wet. The
microorganisms and whatnot are killed and it
doesn't ferment. It stays pretty much indefinite
as long as it isn't disturbed. So
Dean Ray, who was a grain broker at Tulia, met with
us up there and he said that he felt that before too
long it was pretty likely all the elevator
operators and dryers and everybody up there feel,
are afraid that they're just going to get the word
some day that said, shut her down, we haven't got
the gas for you to operate. So he said, I think we're
going to have to get geared up to handle and trade
moist grain. And that would probably involve acid
treated grain. He said, well, we don't know, we
have no basis for trading it. We don't know whether
our structures will hold it. In other words, you
handle wet grain instead of dry. What's your load,
what's your load different going to be? What will
be the effect of acid in terms of corrosion and wear
out of equipment and all that sort of things? What
is in terms of nutrition? I mean, do the animals eat
it just as readily? No problem at that level. We
have fed cattle at Spur with as much We've actually
incorporated as much as 8% acetic and propionic
acid in the total mixture. In other words, 8% of the
total mixture is this acid. Well, at 8%, we got them
to reduce feed intake. And in other words, they
just weren't doing well. We cut them back to 6%
total. and finished a 150-day feeding period. So
we know that they can tolerate this level of acid.
But you said that old boy was using one-half or one
percent? No, it's about roughly you could say one
percent because his grain was pretty dry and he was
dealing with corn instead of sorrel. What's the
cost per hundred on that treatment? The best we can
figure out the cost on it is about 17 cents a
hundred. And that is on a big scale. In other words,
if you're gonna do it small scale where they gotta
ship the stuff in 55 gallon drums and all this, they
figure it's probably about 22 or 23 cents. Well now
how does that compare, John, the economics of
drying and storage in say butler bins or elevators
or whatever on a hundred basis? I have a hunch it's
probably higher. In other words, I think that It
doesn't cost that much to dry the stuff. But you
see, you're dealing with a high level of moisture.
And one reason they're using this, two reasons
they're using it. One is that it gets away from the
high energy expenditure for steam processing.
And the other is that,
presumably at least, the acid has some feeding
value. We know that in ruminants, a big source of
their energy comes from these volatile fatty
acids that are produced in the rumen. Most of the
energy is released as VFAs in the rumen. And the two
prominent ones are acetic and propionic.
And these two are produced in large quantities in
the rumen. Therefore, it would seem perfectly
logical that if we add it to the diet, why we could
manipulate the ratio of these two in the rumen. So
this is one of the reasons we got into it from a
standpoint of interest. It looked like there
might be a possibility, and we were able to change
the acetic-procyonic acid ratios in the rumen by
incorporation of this. But that's all beside the
point as far as this story is concerned. It just
happens to be one end of it. So they started an end of
grain quality and grain characteristics and
stuff out there. And the wet weather gave us the
other end down here with a low quality grain that
nobody knew what it was worth. So we felt that,
okay, we've got both ends of the story now. It looks
as if we do definitely need to do something on grain
quality. And we felt that since we've got all this
damaged grain this year, we should look at it from
the standpoint of its physical
characterization. Now, you're doubtlessly
familiar with these U.S. grain standards. You've
got a certain percentage of total damage and
moisture content and so on. And you've got one,
two, three, four in sample grade. And the grain
that was coming to Beeville was four in sample,
mostly. So it's lower. Here's what we usually
consider a standard, number two grain. Well, is
this mostly now because of, you said some of it was
like 18%, and was it also because of so many broken
kernels? Right. Sprouts, anything, whatever.
But so we felt that, all right, we better start with
the U.S. grain standards. Yeah. and see, all
right, we will do the traditional things that are
done in grading grain, and then we better pursue
this further and do a bunch of non-traditional
things that anybody thinks might be helpful in
characterizing this grain better than is being
done at the present time. So that briefly is what we
thought about with regard to physical
characterization. Can we do something more than
is being done to characterize this as far as its
feeding value is concerned. Secondly was the
microbiological characterization. In other
words, what are the molds and all this sort of stuff
going to do? Have we got aflatoxins, mycotoxins?
And that's where Pettit and Mrs. Tabor come into
the picture. Then we felt the chemical
characterization, which would involve the usual
chemical analysis plus an amino acid
determination and a gross energy determination.
In other words, when the grain has been through
this, what has happened to it? Have we lost some of
the energy content? Has it been leached out? In the
process of sprouting, have some of the starch been
hydrolyzed and utilized to produce a sprout? Does
the sprout pick up in nutrients and provide
nutrients to compensate for the loss in the
remaining grain or not? Well, I think quite
obviously when you put this through the harvest
and cleaning process, all these sprouts
disappear, so they are lost pretty well. So that
lowers it by at least that amount. That's what we
need to know. We need to quantify that sort of
thing. Let me turn this over, John, if you'll mark
your place.